As a new vegetation monitoring index, the KNDVI has certain advantages in characterizing the evolutionary process of regional desertification. However, there are few reports on desertification monitoring based on KNDVI and feature space models. In this study, seven feature parameters, including the kernel normalized difference vegetation index (KNDVI) and Albedo, were introduced to construct different models for desertification remote-sensing monitoring. The optimal desertification remote-sensing monitoring index model was determined with the measured data; then, the spatiotemporal evolution pattern of desertification in Gulang County from 2013 to 2023 was analyzed and revealed. The main conclusions were as follows: (1) Compared with the NDVI and MSAVI, the KNDVI showed more advantages in the characterization of the desertification evolution process. (2) The point–line pattern KNDVI-Albedo remote-sensing index model had the highest monitoring accuracy, reaching 94.93%, while the point–line pattern NDVI-TGSI remote-sensing monitoring index had the lowest accuracy of 54.38%. (3) From 2013 to 2023, the overall desertification situation in Gulang County showed a trend of improvement with a pattern of “firstly aggravation and then alleviation.” Additionally, the gravity center of desertification in Gulang County first shifted to the southeast and then to the northeast, indicating that the northeast’s aggravating rate of desertification was higher than in the southwest during the period. (4) From 2013 to 2023, the area of stable desertification in Gulang County was the largest, followed by the slightly weakened zone, and the most significant transition area was that of extreme desertification to severe desertification. The research results provide important decision support for the precise monitoring and governance of regional desertification.
